# Collaboration in DIAL

## Overview

DIAL can serve as a collaborative and knowledge-sharing platform for the entire organization, where you can create resources such as applications or tools, collaborate with other users on their development, and expose them, when ready to the entire organization on DIAL Marketplace. 

The principle of collaboration rests upon the DIAL's approach to access control which enables users to access resources of other users. 

[DIAL Core](/docs/platform/3.core/0.about-core.md) operates with resources or we can also call them objects. These are applications, conversations, prompts, files and toolsets. DIAL users can add these resource to DIAL and keep them to themselves, we call it a private space. Or, they can enable other users to access these resources based on predefined access rules.

> Refer to [Access Control](/docs/platform/0.architecture-and-concepts/6.access-control.md) to learn more about DIAL's approach to access control, private and public spaces.

To enable collaboration, DIAL includes features accessible through both the [DIAL Core API](https://dialx.ai/dial_api) and the [DIAL Chat user interface](/docs/platform/4.chat/0.about-chat.md).

* [Publication](#publication): DIAL users can publish their private resources to make them accessible to all users or the selected audience.
* [Sharing](#sharing): DIAL users can give access to their private resources to selected users without exposing them to the entire organization.

> Watch a [demo video](/docs/video%20demos/1.Chat/3.dial-collaboration.md) to see collaboration features in action.

## Publication

Publications are a great way to make your applications, agents, prompts, toolsets, or conversations available to a wide audience.

Published resources by default are placed in the Public folder in DIAL file storage and are accessible to all authenticated DIAL users. Subfolders can have access rules applied to restrict access to specific user groups or API keys. Published applications and toolsets are exposed on [DIAL Marketplace](/docs/platform/4.chat/1.marketplace.md) for authorized users, creating a collaboration hub for your organization.

For example, you can publish an application to make it available to all users while continuing to develop the next version in your private space without affecting the published version.

DIAL users can request publication through both the [DIAL Chat UI](/docs/tutorials/0.user-guide.md#publications) and [DIAL Core API](https://dialx.ai/dial_api#tag/Publications). All publication requests require administrator approval to ensure security and safety. [Administrators](/docs/platform/11.admin-panel.md) have access to the Public folder and can modify resources within it.

> Watch a [demo video](/docs/video%20demos/1.Chat/4.dial-publications.md) to see publication in action.

##### Additional Information: 

> * Refer to [Enable Publications](/docs/tutorials/2.devops/1.configuration/1.enable-publications-chat.md) to learn how to enable and configure publications in DIAL Chat.
> * Refer to [Publications](/docs/tutorials/1.developers/1.work-with-resources/0.work-with-publications.md) to see development tutorials.
> * Refer to [Publication API](https://dialx.ai/dial_api#tag/Publications) to see publication endpoints.
> * Refer to [User Guide](/docs/tutorials/0.user-guide.md#publications) to learn about this feature and how to use it in DIAL Chat.

## Sharing

### Users

In cases, when resource owners want to enable access to specific resources without making them public, they can create a sharing link and give it to specific users. This way other users get access to the resource but the resource itself stays in the [private space](/docs/platform/0.architecture-and-concepts/6.access-control.md#private-and-public-spaces) of the resource owner who can modify it or withdraw access at any time.

Sharing is a great way to expose your resources to other users while keeping control over it. For example, you can share a conversation with a colleague to get feedback on it or share an application you developed with a team member to test it.

Additionally, a sharing link can give editing and re-sharing permissions to the recipient. It is a great way to collaborate with other users in real time, for example on developing applications like [Code Apps](/docs/platform/3.core/7.apps.md#code-apps). To track changes, DIAL Core includes an [API](https://dialx.ai/dial_api#tag/Notifications/operation/subscribeToResources) to receive notifications when a resource is modified.

DIAL users can create a sharing link via both [DIAL Chat UI](/docs/tutorials/0.user-guide.md#share-2) and [DIAL Core API](https://dialx.ai/dial_api#tag/Sharing). 

When a resource is shared, it becomes available for a recipient(s) in DIAL Chat, [DIAL Marketplace](/docs/platform/4.chat/1.marketplace.md) and via DIAL Core API.

### Deployments

DIAL provides API for deployments (toolsets and applications) to share resources with each other or to access resources of DIAL users to perform specific actions. 

##### Additional Information: 

> * Refer to [Conversations](/docs/tutorials/0.user-guide.md#share), [Prompts](/docs/tutorials/0.user-guide.md#share-1), [Applications](/docs/tutorials/0.user-guide.md#share-2) to see how DIAL Chat users can share them.
> * Refer to [Sharing](/docs/tutorials/1.developers/1.work-with-resources/1.sharing.md) to see development tutorials.
> * Refer to [Sharing API](https://dialx.ai/dial_api#tag/Sharing) to see sharing endpoints.
> * Refer to [Notifications](/docs/tutorials/1.developers/1.work-with-resources/2.notifications.md) to see development tutorials.
> * Refer to [Notifications API](https://dialx.ai/dial_api#tag/Notifications).
