# Our Vision

AI DIAL is a secure, enterprise-grade and open-source platform. It has an API-first, cloud and model-agnostic design that makes it suitable for a wide variety of use cases.
Our primary focus is to avoid reliance on particular cloud or LLM vendors, support scalability and security, avoid increasing tech complexity or licensing risks.
We prioritize developing use case-agnostic generic features that facilitate developing of GenAI applications.

> To contribute to AI DIAL development, refer to [CONTRIBUTING](https://github.com/epam/ai-dial/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md) instruction on GitHub.

## Main Principles

* **Open-Source**: AI DIAL is an open-source solution available under the permissive and free Apache License, Version 2.0.
* **Low TCO**: We aim to minimize technical complexity and licensing risks by utilizing community hardware, affordable storage solutions, and technologies.
* **Vendor-Agnostic**: AI DIAL can operate on any cloud platform and on-prem, is model and domain agnostic enabling the highest level of flexibility.
* **API-First**: All AI DIAL features are available via API, which empowers the development of custom extensions.
* **Scalable**: AI DIAL does not require a centralized DB and relies on Redis and cloud storages making it an ideal platform for building web-scale businesses.
* **Modular**: Start with a basic setup and scale up to a full ecosystem as needed. Go rapidly from prototyping to fully operational production applications.
* **Small Tech Footprint**: The system requires minimum resources to operate and can run equally smoothly on clouds and personal laptops.
* **Secure**: Sensitive information is stored according to the industry best practices. We support integration with your SSO vendors using OpenID and SAML protocols.
