# Main Concepts and Definitions

## Resources

In AI DIAL, we call *resources* applications, conversations, prompts and files. When added to the system, they are stored in a dedicated folder within a blob store account bucket assigned to your user account. You can handle resources according to the similar pattern (CRUD operations, publications, sharing and other).

> * In [DIAL API](https://dialx.ai/dial_api) you can find dedicated sections for working with resources: [applications](https://dialx.ai/dial_api#tag/Applications), [conversations](https://dialx.ai/dial_api#tag/Conversations), [prompts](https://dialx.ai/dial_api#tag/Prompts) and [files](https://dialx.ai/dial_api#tag/Files).
> * Refer to [Collaboration](/docs/platform/7.collaboration-intro.md) to learn about collaboration features such as sharing and publication that can be applied to resources.
> * Refer to [Applications](/docs/tutorials/0.user-guide.md#applications) to learn how to develop, add and manage apps in DIAL.

## Applications

In AI DIAL, an “application” is any programming logic that conforms to the Unified API of AI DIAL or registered custom endpoints and packaged as a ready-to-deploy solution.
AI DIAL Chat users can engage with applications via standard or fully customized interfaces. Applications can interact via the Unified API or registered custom endpoints, enabling creation of complex scenarios and utilizing all AI DIAL features.
You can expand the platform by introducing custom application types to build the applications you need, using the AI DIAL SDK to streamline the development process.

> Refer to [Applications](/docs/tutorials/0.user-guide.md#applications) to learn how to develop, add and manage apps in DIAL.

## Application Server

AI DIAL acts as application server offering tools for users with different tech skillsets to develop, deploy, and manage different types of GenAI applications while handling scalability, availability, security and resource optimization tasks.

##### Main Principles

* **Development Acceleration**: Built-in Unified API and DIAL SDK streamline the development of Gen AI apps.
* **Integration Enablement**: Enable seamless integration with existing enterprise systems and data sources.  
* **Management Simplification**: Manage all your apps via the DIAL API or the DIAL Control Panel.
* **Performance Optimization**: Optimize resources, manage availability, scalability, and simplify the deployment of your apps.
* **Create Business-Driven Apps**: AI DIAL can be extended beyond its standard capabilities to meet specific business requirements. Add new application types to build fully custom business-driven applications.
