# DIAL as Agentic Platform

## Introduction

DIAL can serve as Agentic Platform, where any existing agent can be used as a building block to create a new agent. You can build simple conversational agents or powerful multi-agent and multi-modal applications solving specific business tasks.

##### What is agent?

**Agents** in DIAL, are all available [language models](#model-adapter) and [DIAL-native applications](#dial-native-app).

## How to use agents?

##### End-users
In [DIAL Marketplace](/docs/tutorials/0.user-guide.md#dial-marketplace), you can access all agents that are available to you. To use an agent, [select it](/docs/tutorials/0.user-guide.md#converse) and start a conversation. When using a multi-agent application, agents are selected and assigned to designated tasks automatically. If the application allows this, it is possible to switch an agent during the ongoing conversation in the [conversation settings](/docs/tutorials/0.user-guide.md#conversation-settings).

##### Developers

DIAL simplifies application development by allowing users to build applications using agents as modular components. This approach removes the need to duplicate existing functionalities, saving time and effort. The platform utilizes a [Unified API of DIAL](https://dialx.ai/dial_api), which provides a standardized interface (OpenAI API compatible) for interacting with all available in DIAL applications and models, simplifying the integration process.

DIAL offers a selection of pre-built agents and also enables users to access agents developed by others. These user-created agents can be shared and made available within the community, providing additional flexibility and opportunities to reuse existing solutions. This modular and collaborative approach improves development efficiency and accelerates the application-building process.

> Refer to [ChatHub video demo](/docs/video%20demos/2.Applications/3.dial-chathub.md) to see the example of a multi-agent application that can be built on the DIAL Platform.

## Available agents

All agents available to a wide audience or a specific user can be found in [DIAL Marketplace](/docs/platform/4.chat/1.marketplace.md).

DIAL includes powerful pre-built agents such as [DIAL ChatHub](/docs/video%20demos/2.Applications/3.dial-chathub.md), [DIAL RAG](/docs/video%20demos/2.Applications/1.dial-rag.md), [DIAL Web RAG](/docs/video%20demos/2.Applications/2.dial-web-rag.md) which you can reuse in your agents as building blocks following [DIAL API](https://dialx.ai/dial_api).

## Create DIAL-Native App

**DIAL-native apps** have API that adheres to [Unified API of DIAL](https://dialx.ai/dial_api). 

##### How to create a DIAL-native application: 

1. You can create DIAL-native apps using [DIAL SDK](https://github.com/epam/ai-dial-sdk/blob/development/README.md) following [DIAL API](https://dialx.ai/dial_api). The DIAL API supports tool calling, allowing your apps to interact with external services to perform specific actions.

        > * Refer to [Tutorials](/docs/tutorials/1.developers/4.apps-development/3.register-app.md#applications-without-predefined-types) to learn how to register your apps in DIAL to use them.
        > * Refer to [Cookbook examples](docs/tutorials/1.developers/4.apps-development/3.multimodality/dial-cookbook/examples/how_to_call_text_to_text_applications.mdx) to learn how to create apps of different modalities.
        > * Refer to [Demo Video](/docs/video%20demos/3.Developers/Applications/5.develop-application.md) to learn how to develop a simple application.

2. DIAL also includes [application types](#application-types) - predefined templates to create DIAL-native apps of specific types using UI wizards.

        > * Refer to [Tutorials](/docs/tutorials/1.developers/4.apps-development/3.register-app.md#application-types) to learn how to register your apps in DIAL to use them.


### Application Types

DIAL includes application types: Quick app, Code app and Mindmap. Application types can be seen as templates for creating custom implementations of specific DIAL-native applications. One of the main advantages of application types, is that they allow adding [application wizards](/docs/tutorials/0.user-guide.md#application-builder) on UI for end-users to create apps in a low and no-code manner.

> Self-hosted deployments of DIAL allow you to add new application types that can use fully custom UI and application wizard.

> * Refer to [Developer Tutorials](/docs/tutorials/1.developers/4.apps-development/3.register-app.md#application-types) to learn more.

#### Quick Apps

DIAL Quick Apps are conceptually similar to OpenAI's GPT. Quick Apps do not contain any programming code (they include a toolset, description and instruction to the language model) and enable you to rapidly build an application right within DIAL Chat, use it, and share it with others. Quick Apps can be used to simplify a workflow or carry out a specific task. For example, you can create a Quick App with a toolset allowing it to call an external API to get a real-time weather forecast for a specific location.

> * Watch a [Demo Video](/docs/video%20demos/2.Applications/5.quick-apps.md) with an introduction to Quick Apps.
> * Refer to [User guide](/docs/tutorials/0.user-guide.md#add-quick-app) to learn how to add Quick Apps.

#### Code Apps

DIAL Code Apps allow you to develop, deploy and run your Python applications directly in the DIAL Chat. It is a useful tool if you need to quickly create an application for the POC, deploy it and share with the selected audience.  

> * Watch a [Demo Video](/docs/video%20demos/2.Applications/4.code-apps.md) with an introduction to Code Apps.
> * Refer to [User guide](/docs/tutorials/0.user-guide.md#add-code-app) to learn how to add Code Apps.

#### Mindmaps

Mindmap enables users to explore information through an interactive knowledge graph and using natural language. You can use this application type to create an app application pulls data from various sources, including documents, URLs, and other data inputs and then presents it on UI as a interactive knowledge graph, facilitating intuitive and engaging user interactions with information.

> Watch [Demo Video](/docs/video%20demos/2.Applications/mindmap-studio.md) to see the AI DIAL Mindmap Studio in action.

## Add Model Adapter

[Unified API of DIAL](https://dialx.ai/dial_api) is compatible with OpenAI API, making it simple to add new adapters for language models or develop them with [DIAL SDK](https://github.com/epam/ai-dial-sdk/blob/development/README.md).

> Refer to [available language models](/docs/platform/2.supported-models.md) to see the list of supported models and available adapters.

