# Overview

## Introduction

JSON Web Token (JWT) is used for Authenticationentication to securely transmit information between a client and a server as a JSON object. When a user logs in, the identity service provider validates the credentials and returns a signed JWT to AI DIAL chat back-end. This JWT contains information about the user's identity. AI DIAL, allows to use various Identity Service Providers (IDPs) to manage user identities.

## Configuration

1. Configure your identity service provider (IDP)
2. Configure AI DIAL Core and Chat to work with your IDP
3. (Optional) Further, you can create roles and permission in AI DIAL for your users. Refer to [Chat Users](/docs/tutorials/2.devops/2.auth-and-access-control/2.chat-users-roles.md) to learn how to do this.

> Refer to [Auth0](/docs/tutorials/2.devops/2.auth-and-access-control/3.configure-idps/auth0.md), [AWS Cognito](/docs/tutorials/2.devops/2.auth-and-access-control/3.configure-idps/cognito.md), [Microsoft Entra ID](/docs/tutorials/2.devops/2.auth-and-access-control/3.configure-idps/entraID.md), [Google Identity](/docs/tutorials/2.devops/2.auth-and-access-control/3.configure-idps/google.md), [Keycloak](/docs/tutorials/2.devops/2.auth-and-access-control/3.configure-idps/keycloak.md), [Okta](/docs/tutorials/2.devops/2.auth-and-access-control/3.configure-idps/okta.md) to view how to enable them as an identity and access management solution for AI DIAL users.

## Example

For example purposes, lets configure Microsoft Entra ID to work with AI DIAL as an identity service provider:

1. [Configure Microsoft Entra ID](/docs/tutorials/2.devops/2.auth-and-access-control/3.configure-idps/entraID.md#configure-microsoft-entra-id): create application, client secret, and user group.
2. [Configure AI DIAL Chat](/docs/tutorials/2.devops/2.auth-and-access-control/3.configure-idps/entraID.md#ai-dial-chat-settings) to work with Microsoft Entra ID.
3. [Configure AI DIAL Core](/docs/tutorials/2.devops/2.auth-and-access-control/3.configure-idps/entraID.md#ai-dial-core-settings) to work with Microsoft Entra ID.
4. (Optional) You can now create and assign roles and limits to manage access control of your users to various system resources such as applications and models. Refer to [Create and assign roles](/docs/tutorials/2.devops/2.auth-and-access-control/3.configure-idps/entraID.md#assignment-of-roles) to learn more. Refer to [Roles & Access Control](/docs/platform/3.core/2.access-control-intro.md) to learn more about roles and how to use them.
