# Roles and Access Control for Chat Users

You can use roles to manage access of chat users to system resources.

1. For chat users, you can define user groups/roles/pools (it depends on a specific IDP) in your identity service provider (IDP) which are then passed to AI DIAL in JWT. Refer to [Auth](/Auth/Web/overview) to view supported IDPs and learn how to configure them.
2. You can then utilize user roles from the JWT claims to define roles in the AI DIAL configuration as a `userRoles` parameter value. In the following example, we grant access to `myApplication` for users in the group `operator`. Using the same pattern, you can define roles for models, addons, assistants. 

> Refer to [settings](https://github.com/epam/ai-dial-core?tab=readme-ov-file#dynamic-settings) to view parameters description and to [configuration example](https://github.com/epam/ai-dial-core/blob/development/sample/aidial.config.json) to view the full example.

```Json
"applications": {
    "myApplication": {
        "userRoles": [
            "operator"
            ]
        }
}
```

3.You can configure roles and limits for chat users to restrict access to specific system resources. If a user has a role A and B which are not mentioned in the `roles` section, limits from the `default` role apply. If the `default` role has not limits - the access is unlimited.

```json
"roles": {
    "azure-group-name": {
        "limits": {
            "chat-gpt-35-turbo": {
                "minute": "200000",
                "day": "10000000"
            }
        }
    }
}
```










1. Configure your IDP to work with AI DIAL for users authentication. Refer to [Auth](/Auth/Web/overview) to learn how to do this.
2. In AI DIAL, add `userRoles` parameter to system resources such as models, applications, addons and assistants to grant access to it for a specific group of users, configured in your IDP. In this example for MS Entra IDP, `"azure-group-name"` role from the `"groups"` claim is configured for `chat-gpt-35-turbo` model:

    ```json
    "models": {
        "chat-gpt-35-turbo": {
        "type": "chat",
        "endpoint" : "http://localhost:7001/v1/openai/deployments/gpt-35-turbo/chat/completions",
        "upstreams": [
            {"endpoint": "http://localhost:7001", "key": "modelKey1"}
        ],
        "userRoles": ["azure-group-name"]
        }
    }
    ```

3. You can add limits for any role to restrict the number of requests to the resource the role is associated with. Refer to [Limits](/Roles%20and%20Limits/overview#limits) to learn more about them.



> In [settings](https://github.com/epam/ai-dial-core?tab=readme-ov-file#dynamic-settings), you can get familiar with the description of the configuration parameters. Refer to [configuration file](https://github.com/epam/ai-dial-core/blob/development/sample/aidial.config.json) to view the full example. 

