# Per-Request Keys

Per-request keys are used to manage access to user files for applications, enable open telemetry for tracing and realize cost control in a lifespan of a particular request.

Per-request keys are generated by AI DIAL Core, when it is making a request to the application and is valid only during the lifetime of this particular request from the Core to the application.

### How It Works

* Let's consider that AI DIAL Core can receive an initial request from AI DIAL Chat or any of its clients. Such request we will call **root** requests. Example: `AI DIAL Chat --> AI DIAL Core`
* AI DIAL Core can perform a series of requests to realize the initial request - let's call them **non-root** requests. Example: `AI DIAL Chat --> AI DIAL Core --> Application A --> AI DIAL Core --> Application B...`

**Root Request**:

1. AI DIAL Core checks that the caller (chat user or application) has enough permissions and limits (based on the [configuration](#api-keys)) to perform the request and generates a new per-request key specifically for this request.
2. AI DIAL Core stores an additional data associated with the per-request key either in memory or in Redis. The data may include but is not limited to: JWT of the user or API key of the application, `trace-id`, `core-parent-span-id`, list of the user files attached to the request.
3. AI DIAL Core passes the per-request key to the application or model adapter in the API-key header. The application or model adapter then send the per-request key back to AI DIAL Core using the same API-key header for model requests or file storage API requests.
4. AI DIAL Core invalidates the per-request key when the request is completed.

**Non-root Requests**:

1. For all non-root requests, AI DIAL Core checks, that the **incoming** per-request key is valid and known (the one from the root request).
2. It checks the permissions of the caller and then generates and saves a new **outgoing** per-request key. This key is also associated with specific data: all data from the root request (its parent request) and the necessary data for the current request.
3. AI DIAL Core passes this new outgoing per-request key in the request header. The application or model adapter then send the per-request key back to AI DIAL Core using the same API-key header for model requests or file storage API requests.
4. AI DIAL Core invalidates the outgoing per-request key when the request is completed.

### Calculating Costs & Limits

Per-request keys can be used to attribute costs and limits incurred by a request to a model to the user or application that initiated the request.

To attribute costs and limits to the request originator, `traceparent` should be included in the request header. `trace-id` is saved throughout the lifespan of the request in memory or in Redis.

### Gathering Statistics

For calculating statistics, AI DIAL Core uses `trace-id` and `core-parent-span-id` that are stored in the additional data linked to the per-request key.

### Files Sharing

Initially, AI DIAL Core verifies the permissions and limits of the request originator using the JWT or API Key associated with the initial request. It then generates a per-request key and links specific user files to it. Throughout the duration of the per-request key and across the entire call stack, AI DIAL Core uses this associated data to determine access rights for the application. If the application attempts to share a file which is not in the list of files associated with the per-request key or directly accessible to this application, the request results in 403 Forbidden error. 

To share the output files with the user, AI DIAL Core grants a full access to the authorized application to a specific output folder in the user's bucket.

To provide the path of the folder for output files, we add `appdata` field to the response for the [GET /v1/bucket](https://epam-rail.com/dial_api#tag/Files/paths/~1v1~1bucket/get). If this request is made with a per-request key the response will contain `appdata` with the path to the shared folder, including the user's bucket and the correct `deployment-id` for the application as registered in the AI DIAL Core configs.

```json
{
  "bucket": "{application-bucket-id}",
  "appdata": "{user-bucket-id}/appdata/{deployment-id}",
}
```

### Telemetry Tracing

For tracing open telemetry, `traceparent` should be included in the request header. The open telemetry tracing does not interfere with the limits, statistics or file sharing.

