# DIAL Overview

## DIAL Introduction

https://youtu.be/2DlK5iMJLFk

DIAL, an acronym for Deterministic Integrator of Applications and Language Models, is a robust, secure, and customizable enterprise-grade AI ecosystem designed to streamline and orchestrate Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC) for enterprise GenAI applications.

DIAL seamlessly integrates with enterprise data and workflows, offering key functionality for building a centralized access point for GenAI solutions and a collaborative development hub for the entire organization.

Key features of DIAL include a powerful [enterprise-grade chat](/docs/tutorials/0.user-guide.md) with connections to many [language models](/docs/platform/2.supported-models.md), a [unified API](https://dialx.ai/dial_api), a GenAI [application server](/docs/platform/0.architecture-and-concepts/2.architecture.md#introduction), and a comprehensive framework for developing, orchestrating, and deploying custom GenAI applications, along with granular [access control](/docs/platform/3.core/2.access-control-intro.md), smart [load balancing](/docs/platform/3.core/5.load-balancer.md), [collaboration tools](/docs/tutorials/2.devops/1.configuration/1.enable-publications-chat.md), [cost control](/docs/platform/0.architecture-and-concepts/2.architecture.md#rate-limits--cost-control), [usage analytics](/docs/platform/0.architecture-and-concepts/2.architecture.md#analytics-realtime) and reporting.

## DIAL App Server and Orchestration Platform

https://youtu.be/Ud2UyXjNK4I

In this video, we demonstrate how DIAL can empower businesses and individuals by serving as a unified GenAI application server, marketplace, as well as orchestration and collaboration platform. 

Key features highlighted in this video:

* GenAI application server offering low and no-code tools to create, use and share custom applications directly in DIAL Chat and via DIAL API.
* GenAI ecosystem and a marketplace with rich collaboration features for end-users.
* No vendor lock-in, enabling the reuse of custom libraries and applications in any cloud or chosen environment.

> * Refer to User Guide to learn more about [DIAL applications](/docs/tutorials/0.user-guide.md#applications) and [DIAL Marketplace](/docs/tutorials/0.user-guide.md#marketplace).
> * Refer to [Our Vision](/docs/platform/0.architecture-and-concepts/0.vision.md) to learn more about DIAL philosophy and vision.