# Release Notes

The purpose of this document is to provide a quick summary of all the biggest new features added in this version and provide some additional description, video, or tutorials for major features. They will be grouped into blocks by functionality.

## DIAL Core

* **Support comments in response feedback**. This allows users to provide additional comments for feedback that is collected in DIAL - not just thumbs up or thumbs down, but full text capabilities.
* **Support global and application type interceptors**. This allows interceptors to be deployed for _all_ instances of a certain application type - for example, an admin can now specify that all Quick Apps must use a PII Anonymizer interceptor, even ones that aren't published. Similarly, global interceptors can enable _all_ requests and responses to models or agents to be routed through an interceptor. 
* **Improve how models and agents share files with each other"**: This feature improves agents' ability to communicate and interact with each other, to allow files and other materials to be shared not just within the context of the individual application, but in scenarios where we orchestrate between several agents at once. For example, DIAL can now pass indexes generated by DIAL RAG with Mind Map applications. 

## Quick Apps 2.0

* **Add feature flag to enable Code Interpreter into Quick App**. This allows Quick Apps to instantly execute generated Python code
* **Improve support for temperature and attachments** within Quick Apps to allow more customization of the different agents/models that Quick Apps orchestrate between. This includes better handling of video- and audio-attachments directly in-line with conversations.

## Adapters

* **OpenAI**: support Sora (video generation), and support speech-to-text (STT) and text-to-speech (TTS) models via Audio API
* **Vertex Adapters**: add Claude 4.1 and 4.5 models and support for gemini-embedding-001
* **Bedrock Adapter**: Support Stability Image Core/Ultra iteration 1, and native document understanding (file upload)

## Admin
 
* Support **multiple identity providers** concurrently in Admin panel
