# Authentication

Authentication is the process of an identity verification.

There are two supported methods to authenticate DIAL Core API calls: JSON Web Token (JWT) and API key. Both options enable control over access to specific resources in DIAL such as applications, files, conversations or prompts.

## API Keys

> Refer also to [Per-Request Keys](/docs/platform/3.core/3.per-request-keys.md) to learn about keys generated by DIAL Core for specific requests.

DIAL utilizes API keys for server-to-server authentication. They are defined and stored in the [dynamic settings of DIAL Core](https://github.com/epam/ai-dial-core?tab=readme-ov-file#dynamic-settings). By associating API keys with roles, you can control which resources they can access and set limits on their usage. This ensures secure and controlled access to your DIAL resources programmatically.

> Refer to tutorials to learn how to [Create API Keys](/docs/tutorials/2.devops/2.auth-and-access-control/0.api-keys.md) and configure [Roles and Limits](/docs/tutorials/2.devops/2.auth-and-access-control/0.api-keys.md) to enable access control.

## JWT

JSON Web Token (JWT) is used for authentication to securely transmit information between a client and a server as a JSON object. When a user logs in, the identity service provider validates the credentials and returns a signed JWT to DIAL Chat back-end. This JWT contains information about the user's identity. DIAL, allows to use various Identity Service Providers (IDPs) to manage user identities.

> Refer to [Roles and Limits](/docs/tutorials/2.devops/2.auth-and-access-control/1.jwt.md) to learn how to enable access control and [Configure IDPs](/docs/tutorials/2.devops/2.auth-and-access-control/2.configure-idps/0.overview.md) to see how to configure identity service providers.