# Programmatic Auth

We use API keys for server-to-server interaction with DIAL Core API. 

To use an API key, it is necessary to create one.

### Step 1: Define API Keys

In the `keys` section in the `aidial.config.json` configuration file, you can add API keys. An API Key should be a secure random key of at least 128 bit size.

> In [dynamic settings](https://github.com/epam/ai-dial-core?tab=readme-ov-file#dynamic-settings), you can get familiar with the description of the configuration parameters.

In the following example, `"myApiKey"` API key is created for a project `"MyProject"` with the `"default"` role:

```json
//Example extract from aidial.config.json
"keys": {
    "myApiKey": {
        "project": "MyProject",
        "role": "default"
    }
}
```

**Important:** API keys must be associated with a project and role; otherwise a key is invalid.

### Step 2: Assign Roles (Required)

To be valid, an API key must be associated with at least one role. Such roles are used to manage access to system resources, impose limits on token usage and sharing. 

> Refer to [About Roles](/docs/platform/3.core/2.access-control-intro.md#about-roles) to learn more.

Roles used by API keys must be declared in the `roles` section in the DIAL Core dynamic settings.

In the previous example, we assigned the `default` role for `myApiKey` API key. On this step, we need to declare the `default` role in the `roles` section to make a valid configuration. 

```json
//Example extract from aidial.config.json
"keys": {
    "myApiKey": {
        "project": "MyProject",
        "role": "default"
    }
},
"roles": {
    "default": {}
}
```

### Step 3: Configure Limits (Optional)

You can define limits for roles in the `roles` section of the DIAL Core dynamic settings. This allows you to control access to system resources, impose restrictions on token usage or sharing of a specific resource.

> Refer to [dynamic settings](https://github.com/epam/ai-dial-core?tab=readme-ov-file#dynamic-settings) to see other configuration options for roles.

**Important**: if limits are not defined, the access is **unlimited**. 

> Refer to [Roles & Access Control](/docs/tutorials/2.devops/2.auth-and-access-control/1.api-key-roles.md) to learn how to define access limits for API keys. 

In this example, we grant an unlimited access for the `default` role to the `chat-gpt-35-turbo` model. 

```json
//Example extract from aidial.config.json
"keys": {
    "myApiKey": {
        "project": "MyProject",
        "role": "default"
    }
},
"roles": {
    "default": { //role name
        "limits": {
            "chat-gpt-35-turbo": //system resource
            {}
        }
    }
}
```