# Prometheus method
## Introduction
[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) is an open-source monitoring and alerting toolkit designed for reliability and scalability. It collects metrics from configured targets at specified intervals, stores them in a time-series database, and provides powerful querying capabilities. With its flexible architecture, Prometheus is particularly suited for dynamic environments, making it a popular choice for cloud-native applications and microservices. Its intuitive visualization tools help teams gain deep insights into system performance, ensuring timely detection of issues.

[Prometheus operator](https://prometheus-operator.dev/) The Prometheus Operator manages Prometheus clusters atop Kubernetes.
## Configuration
### AI DIAL Core Settings
Add the following environment variable to AI DIAL Core configuration. Refer to [AI DIAL Core](https://github.com/epam/ai-dial-helm/tree/main/charts/dial-core) to learn more.
```json
containerPorts.metrics
metrics.enabled
metrics.serviceMonitor.enabled
```
The default port for collecting metrics in most dial applications is 9464. If necessary, you can change the parameter `containerPorts.metrics`

### AI DIAL Extentions Settings
Add the following environment variable to AI DIAL Extentions configuration. Refer to [AI DIAL Extentions](https://github.com/epam/ai-dial-helm/tree/main/charts/dial-extension) to learn more.
```json
containerPorts.metrics
metrics.enabled
metrics.serviceMonitor.enabled
```
The default port for collecting metrics in most dial applications is 9464. If necessary, you can change the parameter `containerPorts.metrics`

## Examples
```
TBD?
```