# Overview

AI DIAL can serve as a collaborative and knowledge-sharing platform for the entire organization. To facilitate this, we provide a variety of features accessible through both the API and the chat user interface.

> In AI DIAL, [resources](/docs/architecture.md#resources) refers to conversations, prompts, files, and applications. 

* [Publication](/docs/tutorials/collaboration/2.enable-publications.md): you can publish resources making them accessible to the selected audience in your organization.
* [Sharing](/docs/tutorials/collaboration/3.sharing.md): you can share your resources with a specific person.
* [Notifications](/docs/tutorials/collaboration/4.notifications.md): you can receive notifications when specific events occur.


> Watch a [demo video](/docs/video%20demos/1.Chat/3.dial-collaboration.md) to see collaboration features in action.

## Publication

You can publish/unpublish conversations, prompts (or even a collection of those) and applications, making them accessible within your organization. Additionally, you can manage access to the published [resources](/docs/architecture.md#resources), ensuring that the right information is accessible to the right individuals or teams.

> * Watch a [demo video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GxdhfWLspa0) to see publication feature in action.
> * Refer to [user guide](/docs/user-guide.md#flow) to learn how chat users can use publications for conversations, prompts and applications.
> * Refer to [Tutorials](#) to learn how to enable this feature in AI DIAL Chat and [Tutorials](#) to learn how developers can work with it.

## Sharing

> Refer to [Tutorials](#) to learn more.

In AI DIAL, [resources](/docs/architecture.md#resources) refers to conversations, prompts, files, and applications. When a resource is created or uploaded to DIAL, it is stored in a dedicated [storage bucket](/docs/architecture.md#persistent-layer). You can share these resources with other users or applications. The sharing functionality is available through both the DIAL API and the AI DIAL Chat UI.


Chat users can share their resources with others, accept sharing invitations, and view resources that have been shared by or with them. When conversations that include attachments are shared, all attachments are also shared and can be accessed through the chat file manager.

Refer to AI DIAL Chat user guide for details: 

* [Conversations/Share](/docs/user-guide.md#share)
* [Conversations/Unshare](/docs/user-guide.md#unshare)
* [Prompts/Share](/docs/user-guide.md#share-1)
* [Prompts/Unshare](/docs/user-guide.md#unshare-1)
* [Attachments Manager](/docs/user-guide.md#attachments-manager)

## Notification

> Refer to [Tutorials](#) to learn more.
