# DIAL Product Overview

## DIAL Introduction

https://youtu.be/2DlK5iMJLFk

DIAL, an acronym for Deterministic Integrator of Applications and Language Models, is a robust, secure, and customizable enterprise-grade AI ecosystem designed to streamline and orchestrate Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC) for enterprise GenAI applications.

DIAL seamlessly integrates with enterprise data and workflows, offering key functionality for building a centralized access point for GenAI solutions and a collaborative development hub for the entire organization.

Key features of DIAL include a powerful [enterprise-grade chat](/docs/user-guide.md) with connections to many [language models](../../supported-models), a [unified API](https://epam-rail.com/dial_api), a GenAI [application server](../../architecture#introduction), and a comprehensive framework for developing, orchestrating, and deploying custom GenAI applications, along with granular [access control](../../Roles%20and%20Access%20Control/overview), smart [load balancing](../../tutorials/load-balancer), [collaboration tools](../../tutorials/Collaboration/enable-publications), [cost control](../../architecture#rate-limits--cost-control), [usage analytics](../../architecture#analytics-realtime) and reporting.

## DIAL App Server and Orchestration Platform

https://youtu.be/Ud2UyXjNK4I

In this video, we demonstrate how AI DIAL can empower businesses and individuals by serving as a unified GenAI application server, marketplace, as well as orchestration and collaboration platform. 

Key features highlighted in this video:

* GenAI application server offering low and no-code tools to create, use and share custom applications directly in AI DIAL Chat and via DIAL API.
* GenAI ecosystem and a marketplace with rich collaboration features for end-users.
* No vendor lock-in, enabling the reuse of custom libraries and applications in any cloud or chosen environment.

> * Refer to User Guide to learn more about [DIAL applications](../../user-guide#applications-1) and [DIAL Marketplace](../../user-guide#marketplace).
> * Refer to [Our Vision](https://github.com/epam/ai-dial/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md#project-vision) to learn more about AI DIAL philosophy and vision.