# How to Register an App in DIAL

To use an application in DIAL, it must first be registered in [DIAL Core](https://github.com/epam/ai-dial-core). Once registered, the application's configuration is saved in the DIAL Core as a JSON schema, and a dedicated folder for application files is created in the associated BLOB storage linked to the application's author.

## Register DIAL-Native Apps

DIAL-native applications conform to the  [Unified API of DIAL](https://dialx.ai/dial_api), allowing them to be used as building blocks in other agents.

> Refer to [Agentic Platform](/docs/platform/0.architecture-and-concepts/4.agentic-platform.md) to learn more about agents in DIAL.

### Using DIAL API

#### Application Types

DIAL provides application types, which are predefined templates for creating DIAL-native apps of specific types. Each application type is defined by a JSON schema stored in the DIAL Core configuration. The schema defines the structure of the application type, including its properties, endpoints and other parameters. The schema also defines the UI elements that are used to create the application wizard. Each schema conforms to the main meta schema.

> Refer to [Agentic Platform](/docs/platform/0.architecture-and-concepts/4.agentic-platform.md#application-types) to learn more about application types.

You can use application types to create custom implementations, which can be registered in DIAL via the [PUT call](https://dialx.ai/dial_api#tag/Applications/operation/saveCustomApplication). In the request body, you must provide:

* `applicationTypeSchemaId`: The identifier of the schema for the application type you want to use as a template. You can retrieve available schemas via the [GET Schemas](https://rail-landing.staging.deltixhub.io/dial_api#tag/Applications/operation/listCustomApplicationSchemas) API call.
* `application_properties`: A valid JSON object representing the application's structure, conforming to the specified schema. If the JSON object is invalid, the request will fail.
  - If `applicationTypeSchemaId` is absent or `NULL`, `application_properties` are not required.
  - If `applicationTypeSchemaId` is provided but `application_properties` are `NULL`, the application is considered a "stub" and can be updated later, but completion requests will not be possible.
  - For applications with schemas, all requests are routed to endpoints specified in `application_properties`.

    ```json
    //Example for your reference
    {
        "copilot_deck_app": {
          "displayName": "Copilot Deck Explorer",
          "description": "You can ask about the copilot deck there",
          "applicationTypeSchemaId": "https://mydial.epam.com/custom_application_schemas/quickapps",
          "applicationProperties": {
            "temperature": 0.8,
            "instructions": "You should help explore the document containing the Copilot Deck. You must query the document first to do that. You should answer using only the information in the document. Answer \"I don't know\" if there are any other questions.",
            "model": "gpt-4o-2024-05-13",
            "web_api_toolset": [],
            "document_relative_url": "files/DpZGXdhaTxt4FYCWNadE2Ln/GPT%20Deck.docx"
          }
        }
      }
    ```

#### Add Application Types

**In self-hosted deployments of DIAL**, you can add custom application types alongside standard ones. Application types allow you to create apps with custom UIs and wizards, enabling end-users to build apps using low-code or no-code tools.

To add a new application type:

* Create a JSON schema that conforms to the [meta schema](https://rail-landing.staging.deltixhub.io/dial_api#tag/Applications/operation/getMetaSchemaOfCustomApplicationSchema).
* Add the schema to the DIAL Core configuration.
* Use the schema to create custom implementations of applications of that type.

#### Applications Without Predefined Types

Applications that do not belong to any predefined application type (and thus lack a JSON schema) can still be registered in DIA:

1. Use the [PUT call](https://dialx.ai/dial_api#tag/Applications/operation/saveCustomApplication), where in the request body you provide specific parameters for your application. You can see them in DIAL Core documentation under the [dynamic setting](https://github.com/epam/ai-dial-core?tab=readme-ov-file#dynamic-settings) for `applications`.

    ```json
    //Example for your reference
    {
      "application": {
        "endpoint": "http://localhost:7001/openai/deployments/10k/chat/completions",
        "displayName": "MyApp",
        "iconUrl": "https://host/app.svg",
        "description": "My application description",
        "userRoles": ["AdminROle"],
        "forwardAuthToken": true,
        "features": {
          "rateEndpoint": "http://host/rate",
          "configurationEndpoint": "http://host/configure"
        },
        "maxInputAttachments": 10,
        "inputAttachmentTypes": ["type1", "type2"],
        "defaults": {
          "paramStr": "value",
          "paramBool": true,
          "paramInt": 123,
          "paramFloat": 0.25
        },
        "interceptors": ["interceptor1", "interceptor2", "interceptor3"]
      }
    }
    ```

2. When registered in DIAl Core, the application is displayed in the DIAL Marketplace for the configured user roles and all application files are saved in a dedicated to your user BLOB storage. Such apps also have a JSON file, but instead of a schema describing the structure, it includes only the chat completion endpoint used by this application.

### Using UI Wizards

Application types in DIAL can include UI wizards, which simplify the creation of applications of specific types. Apps built using these wizards are automatically registered in DIAL Core and can be displayed in the DIAL Marketplace.

> Refer to [User guide](/docs/tutorials/0.user-guide.md#applications) to learn how to create applications using wizards.

## Bring Apps to DIAL

**In self-hosted deployment of DIAL**, you can create a single access point for all your apps built on other platforms by bringing them to DIAL. 

* Register the app's UI to list it in the Marketplace.
* Register the app's API to access all DIAL Core features. Refer to [DIAL Core dynamic settings](https://github.com/epam/ai-dial-core?tab=readme-ov-file#dynamic-settings) to learn how to define `routes`.


